For daily news stories, visit newscientist.com/news

60 Seconds

Imagestate - Impact Photos/Alamy

Cancer megadata
IT’S huge and it could help cure cancer. That’s the aim, anyway, of the world’s largest cancer database, launched this week.
The online resource, called
“It’s the world’s largest cancer database and contains 1.7 billion experimental results”

“Quote to go in here over four lines range left like this Quote to go in her like this xxxxx”

MERS flies to Spain
The first case of Middle East respiratory syndrome in Spain was confirmed last week. A 61-year-old woman probably caught the virus during the Hajj. Saudi Arabian doctors had diagnosed pneumonia and allowed her to fly back to Spain. Spanish health authorities are now contacting passengers who took the same flight.

CanSAR, was developed by a team

at the Institute of Cancer Research

in London, and contains 1.7 billion

experimental results relating to

genes, clinical trials and

pharmacological data.

The idea is to provide a free computerised system that can

Ban won’t help

analyse the huge amounts of data THIS will create a splash.

accumulated over the past decade A much-praised ban on European

on cancer, in order to provide

fishing boats throwing unwanted

leads for genes or drug targets

catch overboard won’t save the

to pursue for future treatments. continent’s fisheries, a report

For example, CanSAR

published this week says.

summarises what is known about The revised Common Fisheries

any gene of interest, including

Policy, expected to come into

which drugs react with it and

force from 2014, will ban the

whether it is active in healthy

practice of fishers discarding fish.

tissue. A prototype evaluated

They do it because the fish are

479 cancer-associated genes,

unmarketable or to comply with

and picked out 46 leads, many not European Union limits on how

previously considered as targets

for therapy (Nature Reviews Drug “The unwanted fish would

Discovery, doi.org/p2p).

probably end up being sold

“It means people can focus

as cheap fish meal, animal

their efforts on targets most likely feed and even pet food”

to give returns in the short term,”

says Bissan Al-Lazikani, head of much of certain species can be

the team that developed CanSAR. landed at port. As much as half

their catch can be thrown back,

Marc Verpoorten/eyevine

with very few fish surviving.

The discards ban has gained

widespread support.

But after examining market

data and catch logs for UK North

Sea trawlers, where a quarter of

the fish netted are thrown back

because they are too small or the

wrong species, Harriet Condie of

the University of East Anglia in

Norwich, UK, and colleagues

conclude that banning discarding

alone won’t help protect fish

stocks. The unwanted fish would

probably end up being sold as

–Don’t inhale– cheap fish meal for aquaculture,

Malicious mould

–No throwing them back–
animal feed and even pet food. The ban will only work, she says, if it is combined with tough sciencebased quotas on total catches (Fisheries Research, doi.org/p25).
CCTV on ships could stop fishers chucking back unwanted fish, says Tom Catchpole of the Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science in Lowestoft, UK.
Mum’s milk money
IT’S a case of cash for breast milk. A pilot scheme being launched in two UK cities will offer new mothers shopping vouchers worth up to £200, if they breastfeed their babies for the first six months of their lives.
Nourishing Start for Health, or NOSH, run by the University of Sheffield, will be available to mothers in Sheffield and Chesterfield. Breastfeeding reduces the risk of many diseases, for both mother and child, but in these areas, only about 25 per cent of women breastfeed, even for the first two months of life. The national average is 55 per cent. According to a UNICEF study, the UK National Health Service could save £31 million a year by increasing breastfeeding.
The US, Canada and France have also tried giving mothers a financial incentive to breastfeed – with some success.

A compound emitted by mould may be linked with Parkinson’s disease. Exposure to a chemical called 1-octen-3-ol, or mushroom alcohol, causes degeneration of dopamine neurons and movement disorders in fruit flies. Parkinson’s has previously been linked to synthetic chemicals, but this is the first link with a natural one (PNAS, doi.org/p29).
Harmless space fall
A European Space Agency satellite fell safely to Earth on 10 November, despite fears that its wreckage could cause harm. The GOCE craft, designed to map Earth’s gravity, made an uncontrolled, but expected, re-entry after running out of fuel. Estimates suggested up to a quarter of its 1-tonne mass could survive the plunge, but all of the debris fell into the ocean near the Falkland islands.
Comet looks brighter
Comet ISON may yet give skywatchers the light show they hoped for. When it was discovered, the comet was predicted to outshine the moon, but it hasn’t brightened as expected. Now hobbyists who spied it with binoculars say it may be visible to the naked eye later this month.
Ozone and more
Some good ideas keep on giving. The 1987 Montreal protocol saved the ozone layer by phasing out the use of chlorofluorocarbons. But CFCs are also powerful greenhouse gases, so cuts may have contributed to a recent slowdown in global warming (Nature Geoscience, doi.org/p2b).

16 November 2013 | NewScientist | 5
