Journal of Sustainable Tourism
ISSN: 0966-9582 (Print) 1747-7646 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rsus20
Book Review
John Edwards
To cite this article: John Edwards (2005) Book Review, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 13:2, 195-197, DOI: 10.1080/09669580508668485 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09669580508668485
Published online: 22 Dec 2008. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 33 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rsus20

Download by: [UW-Madison (GeoDeepDive)]

Date: 14 May 2017, At: 10:09

JOS b167

Book Reviews

In Search of H.V. Morton Michael Bartholomew. London: Methuen, 2004. Pp. xxii + 248. ISBN 0-413-77138-5 (hbk): £18.99.
These days we are very familiar with first-person travel narratives – which, if they are to be successful, usually require a light rather than a didactic touch. Of course, the accounts provided by Paul Theroux, Jonathan Raban and Bill Bryson involve more than funny encounters in funny locations. They also teach us something – but what? We may pick up a few factual titbits, but it is a general tone or sense of place that we often come away with. Given the almost infinite possibilities for selection and description, it follows that we are presented with a highly subjective assessment of an author’s experiences. This, in turn, suggests that the pivotal matter about which we are learning is the narrator’s character. After going to the Hindu Kush with Eric Newby, to Brazil or Manchuria with Peter Fleming, or to Europe or the West Indies with Patrick Leigh Fermor, we knew more about Newby, Fleming and Fermor than anything else. This point becomes even clearer as the works themselves become more ‘literary’ – consider the travel writings of Graham Greene and Evelyn Waugh. All books, of course, come to us through particular eyes, but being able to categorise them as fiction or non-fiction means giving those eyes more or less scope for personal involvement. The travel genre, however, is a curious and confusing amalgam in this sense, and the classic ‘travel books’ – whatever they may purport to be – are not Baedeker or Michelin.
Curiosity and confusion can be appealing, and a mingling of fact and fiction can be downright seductive. This is nowhere more evident than in the many books by Henry Canova Vollam Morton – Harry to his family and friends, and H.V. Morton to

millions of readers around the world. Today, a generation after Morton’s death, one can still find copies of his work on the higher and dustier shelves of second-hand book shops (and Methuen produce new editions, too); and, by easy application to the internet, one finds that there now exists an H.V. Morton Society, that he is honoured by a blue plaque in his birthplace, Ashtonunder-Lyne, that his life and works have been celebrated in a travelling Tameside exhibition, and so on.
Michael Bartholomew begins this fine biography by admitting to a ‘slightly guilty taste for the arcadian fantasy’ of a mythical England of hedgerow and cottage, country pubs and village worthies. He is hardly alone. A country idyll, a time long past, a childhood lost – these are mental images of great appeal to many sensibilities. Houseman caught them in only eight lines, in his Shropshire Lad, with his ‘blue remembered hills’ in the ‘land of lost content’. And Morton caught them, too – nowhere better than in his first and most famous book, In Search of England, a series of articles from his regular Daily Express column. The book appeared in 1927, and was followed quickly by many others – the most notable of which were The Call of England, In Search of Scotland, In Search of Ireland and In Search of Wales. Later, and to rather lesser effect, Morton wrote accounts of his travels in the Middle East (In the Steps of the Master), in South Africa (In Search of South Africa) – to which he had emigrated in 1948 and where he died in 1979, at the age of 87 – and in Spain and Italy.
Bartholomew’s rationale for his biography rests upon a threefold interest: what I have just called the curiosities of the travel genre itself; the ‘British identity’; and the fascinating mismatch between Morton the writer and Morton the private man. These are all central to my interest in this biography, too, as well as to what underpins it. The ‘travel book’ is a product of contradictions, and a

Book Reviews

195

196 Journal of Sustainable Tourism

reflection and depiction of myth – and, I suggest, these two features are closely intertwined.
First, then, there is the power and appeal of story, image and selective perception. While the market for the English myth – ‘warm beer, sun-dappled cricket pitches and elderly spinsters cycling safely to evensong’, as Brixton-bred John Major characterised it – is ‘perpetually buoyant’, its stock prices increase with two variables: distance and disorder. The first of these has both temporal and geographical aspects. We look back, sometimes a long way back, to fuller and less troubled lives – our own (the lost childhood theme) or those of others (our forebears, happy before the fall). We also conjure up loved images of people and places when we ourselves are far away: hence the yearnings of the expatriate. The expression of these can range from the behaviour of Somerset Maugham’s colonial administrators in Malaya – carefully dressing for dinner in the jungle, or going through the irregularly-received copies of the Times in strict daily order – to the altogether frothier sentiments of magazines (This England and Evergreen, for instance) aimed at the English abroad. A writer in This England observed that Morton’s books ‘combine the discipline of a journalist … with the heart of a poet who has an intense love of his homeland’. The facts – that Morton was not a particularly disciplined journalist, and that his poetic patriotism was well tempered with more venal motives – are much less relevant than the creation.
The other factor contributing to a bull market in nostalgia is disorder. People are more apt to be attracted by idylls, however illusory, when their own lives are insecure. It is no coincidence, then, that the most popular of Morton’s works were the early ones, those appearing in politically and economically fragile times. In Search of England, a sort of reworking of Cobbett’s Rural Rides, was an immediate success, and the onset of the war only reinforced its appeal: it reached its 30th English edition by the mid-1940s. It also sold well in America –

to English people there, certainly, but also to that perennial American questing for rosy pictures of the mother country. (It is worth recalling that there were contemporary equivalents of Morton in America itself. The most famous was Wallace Nutting, with his ‘States Beautiful’ series [Vermont Beautiful, Connecticut Beautiful and six others]; like Morton, Nutting also ventured overseas, producing England Beautiful and Ireland Beautiful. Nutting’s books were essentially extended photo-essays, but they were intended for the same market, and the same yearnings, as Morton’s texts.)
If we consider the temporal aspect of distance, we see that it links closely with the other factor, disorder – and the linkage exists under the more general heading of ‘change’ or, more specifically, perceived change for the worse. Thus, Morton and other good travel writers who appeal to the expatriate can also appeal to those who remain at home. The tug is there for all those who regretfully remember that, where the Royal Oak and the village green used to be, there is now a shopping mall. But we can even extend the readership to those who never think about old country inns, to those who love shopping precincts – providing they have some minimal sense of the past, real or mythical, and an appetite for story.
Turning to ‘contradictions’, and mixtures of fact and fiction, we see that the tendencies we now observe – and, indeed, value – in the work of travel writers was brought to a high point by Morton. The essential difference between then and now, between the Mortons and the Therouxs (in this regard), is that earlier writers took pains to conceal inconsistencies, while later ones glory in them; this is a matter of cultural norms and expectations.
Here are some of the more interesting and suggestive inconsistencies we find in Morton. The poetic descriptions of rural bliss (or, indeed, of the hidden romance of urban life: see The Heart of London) came from a cynical professional journalist. His interest in the wide world coincided with a depressingly familiar parcel of

Book Reviews

197

prejudices: his real feelings about Jews, black people and Americans (unless they were silk-stockinged girls, eager for knowledge and guidance) are fully revealed in the private memoirs that his biographer draws upon here; and his stereotypes, when not racially prejudiced, were stock-theatrical – he writes of the ‘slow Saxons’ of Hampshire, the ‘Celtic fluency’ of Cornish village life, the pride and sentimentality of the impoverished Highlanders, the ‘anti-materialist dreamers’ of Ireland. Morton’s politics were both facile and shallow: he admired Mosley’s fascists and German national socialism, and he deprecated democracy.
His apparently casual meetings with interesting people in city streets and country lanes – as he bowled along in his bullnosed Morris Cowley – were often stage-managed or pre-arranged. The assumption that Morton was a solitary traveller, starting and stopping as fancy and chance dictated is also incorrect – in fact, this sexually voracious man often had a lover in the passenger seat. His implicit and explicit recommendations to his readers, to get out and see a world on the point of disappearing forever, can be seen to have heralded the motorised invasions that so quickly altered that world.
All of this, we must not forget, coexisted with Morton’s real love of the English myth, and his desire that his readers take seriously his various ‘searches’. If this affection, viewed in the light of private revelation and biographical enquiry, now seems somewhat tainted to us, we ought not to doubt its reality for Morton himself. It is suggestive that it survived, in suitably altered shape, the writer’s post-war emigration to South Africa: living in the lap of considerable luxury, Morton sought and found an arcadian contrast to grey socialist Britain. In the southern sunshine, a white man could still live very well, he found. The myth reshaped itself admirably in new surroundings and, like that of many of his readers, Morton’s affection was heightened by distance. It was also reinforced by prejudice: ‘if I felt homesick,’ he wrote to his wife while on a trip to London, ‘a

memory of the Strand, with its surging droves of lower middle class people without hats and mackintoshes would cure me of it’. And black people, he pointed out to her, ‘stroll about London like privileged human beings’.
Morton’s success rested upon several pillars. His journalistic capacities enabled him to cleverly and quickly respond to broadly-held needs and wishes – later, as his fame grew, he was of course able to stimulate further demand. He had a genuine affection for his subjects, convoluted though this no doubt was. And he was capable of good writing, with an ear for speech and an eye for scene. Thanks to Bartholomew’s biography, however, we now know of other ingredients. My sense is that the contradictions so evident in Morton and other ‘travel writers’ can be seen as underpinning that intriguing intermingling of fact and fiction that is so much a feature of their narratives. Success in the genre – where success, of course, is not the same thing as Baedeker’s truth – may thus centrally depend upon the ‘conflicted’ personality of the author.
John Edwards
St Francis Xavier University
References Bryson, Bill (2000) In a Sunburned
Country. New York: Broadway. Fermor, Patrick Leigh (1977) A Time of
Gifts. London: John Murray. Fleming, Peter (1933) Brazilian
Adventure. London: Cape Greene, Graham (1961) In Search of a
Character. London: Bodley Head Newby, Eric (1958) A Short Walk in the
Hindu Kush. London: Secker & Warburg Nutting, Wallace (1922) Vermont Beautiful. Boston: Old America. Raban, Jonathan (1979) Arabia Through the Looking Glass. London: Collins. Theroux, Paul (1983) The Kingdom by the Sea. London: Hamish Hamilton. Waugh, Evelyn (1946) When the Going was Good. London: Duckworth.

198 Journal of Sustainable Tourism

Safety and Security in Tourism C. Michael Hall, Dallen J. Timothy and David Timothy Duval. New York: The Haworth Hospitality Press, 2004. Pp. 340. ISBN 0-7890-1916-7 (hbk); $69.95. ISBN 0-7890-1917-5 (pbk); $39.95.
This book continues the tradition of the Haworth Hospitality Press of publishing in book form a special edition of the Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing (Volume 15 (2–4)). As such the material in it will not be new to many readers of Journal of Sustainable Tourism. Having said that, the book is indeed topical and comprehensive, as one of the pre-production reviewers has noted, providing a series of case-studies in how (and indeed how not to) respond to security challenges involving tourism and tourists. Each of the chosen papers becomes a chapter in the book (17 in all), held together by the excellent introductory overview contributed by Hall, Timothy and Duval, and some linking efforts by some of the individual authors presumably added during revision for this work. It is a pity in a way that the editors did not add a further reflective chapter as a conclusion and elaboration, since their initial chapter is without a doubt the highlight of the book.
Overall, the book is of variable quality, as unfortunately are many produced in this way. Particular highlights for this reviewer were the chapters by Hall, Timothy and Duval; Thapa; McKercher and Hui; Prideaux; and Coles. Several of the others suffer from being either written pre-SARS and/or the plethora of recent security problems, or are of limited general applicability due to their data or chosen topic. While neither of these criticisms implies that such chapters are not thoughtful or well-written, the result is that on first view the compendium as a whole lacked a single powerful thrust. To a large extent though, this shortcoming is offset by the first-mentioned chapters, and it is to those that I now turn.
Hall, Timothy and Duval argue that notions of security have broadened significantly since the end of the Cold

War. They note that security concerns that impact on travel, and therefore on tourism should now be seen as commonplace, and their solutions multilateral in nature. While I am not sure that they have fully articulated the reasons behind this shift, given that they make little mention of factors such as control over resources as being partly behind the call for enhanced security measures (tell the public that the terrorists are after the oil and you disguise the fact that you are after it yourselves – even more important if the oil you want is in the so-called ‘terrorists’ own country), they are certainly right when they say that tourism has little or no influence on this debate or on resulting actions. However, the authors do note the all-pervasive influence of the media in the present discourse on security, an influence that is heavily bound up with the politics of the debate, and importantly recognise that other forms of security (environment, health) are as important as those espoused by governments (resources, war on terror) to tourists. Altogether a very good chapter that sets the scene for the book wisely and well, even though their discussion of SARS obviously predated the realisation that this particular problem was as much a media construct as a real security or health problem.
McKercher and Hui (6, 99–116) conducted ‘before and after’ surveys of Hong Kong outbound travellers (somewhat fortuitously) with respect to the 9/11 incident in the United States, and they report on these in this chapter. They note importantly that there is usually a softening of intentions to travel, but not necessarily a decline in actual participation rates, amongst groups not directly affected by a particular incident. They also note that 9/11 was not an isolated incident, that there is a common thread of media coverage influencing psychological proximity and therefore of reactions to a particular event, and that ‘disaster’ impacts are usually of limited duration and often overlay/obscure the cyclical nature of travel demand, which is based in economic health not security

Book Reviews

199

concerns. Altogether a very readable and realistic analysis.
The chapter by Brijesh Thapa (7, 117–138) is the next major highlight in the book. This examines the domestic instability and international problems affecting tourism in Nepal. It is an excellent survey of the recent past, and makes the important point that a pre-existing domestic emergency (political instability) can be more important than outside pressures (the 1990s’ Indian blockade of Nepal is discussed in terms of the latter influence) in determining the number of tourists that may or may not visit any particular country. Tim Coles (10, 173–198) attempts (and largely succeeds) in his chapter to provoke a wider academic debate on the topic of tourism and security by looking at the underlying political, intellectual, social and economic framing conditions for security problems and our responses to them. This is critical, and yet few authors have managed to do this. He is advocating a more strategic approach to risk because crisis management is more complex than the linear WTO/WHO models suggest, and ‘crises’ are in fact more commonplace than hitherto realised. His case study material concentrates on local government responses to disasters, and of course his analysis reveals, as so many have done before, that this level of government is singularly ill-equipped to cope with crises in practice. He makes the point that crisis management in tourism needs new planning, but that responsible authorities are yet to decide on the best level for this planning.
Bruce Prideaux (15, 281–298) contributes another good analysis to this collection. He concentrates on the Australian Federal Government’s recent responses to travel security concerns, but also injects a welcome theoretical discussion in measuring these against Bill Faulkner’s TDMF model (Faulkner, 2001). In this chapter he also does a decent job of updating statistics on security and travel, but his main messages are that government responses to security concerns in tourism are generally inadequate, that

as a result there is no contingency planning, and that one of the reasons for this situation is that there is a lack of tourism advisory bodies at a national level other than the marketing arm. I have a feeling though that his comments on the fact that many security concerns in the Australian traveller context are neither related to tourism, or in Australia itself may be a more powerful explanation of his results.
Space does not allow me to cover in detail the remaining contributions. While I think that they do not by and large come up to the standard set by the above chapters, there are useful insights to be gained from their reading. Floyd et al. (2, 19–38), for example, suggest that social risk (the impact of friends and family members) should be the subject of further research as an influencing variable on decision-making, while Kingsbury and Brunn (3, 39–62) note that tourism is a construct of the wealthy, who are perhaps more likely to give credence to travel advisories on security, especially if their politics fits with the advice issued. In all though, the book is a very useful compendium of material on the question of security in tourism and does, as the publishers suggest, give us a better knowledge base from which to analyse political, social and touristic responses to future events.
Managing Tourist Health and Safety in the New Millennium Jeff Wilks and Stephen J. Page (eds). Oxford: Pergamon Advances in Tourism Research Series, 2003. Pp. xix + 247. ISBN 0-08-044000-2 (hbk).
With a foreword by Sir Frank Moore, Chair of the Australian Tourism Forecasting Council, this book is dedicated to one of the pioneers of Australian tourism research, Bill Faulkner. Part of his seminal work on a theoretical framework for tourism safety is reproduced in the book (previously published), and a number of the chapter authors refer to his

200 Journal of Sustainable Tourism

constructs in their own discourses. Offering 14 chapters in four sections plus an introduction and conclusion, the book is very professionally produced and edited by Jeff Wilks and Stephen Page. A mix of business, government, legal and academic viewpoints has been collected together by the editors, and this provides a wide-ranging although variable coverage of the field of tourism health and safety.
For this reviewer, the highlights of the book (apart from the re-use of Bill Faulkner’s work – which, however, should have been given a much more prominent place in the theoretical underpinnings of the book, it does not really qualify as a ‘selected issue’) are Chris Ryan’s work in Section 2 on the question of risk acceptance in adventure tourism, Trevor and Trudie Atherton’s chapter on current issues in travel and tourism law, and Bruce Prideaux on international tourists and transport safety. The rest of the book I thought suffered from a significant level of special pleading (especially that of trying to force greater travel agent responsibility for health warnings and treatment), sweeping generalisations, out-of-date data, and undocumented impacts (chapter authors’ own words) being raised to the level of ‘problems’ (especially the chapter on midges in Scotland). A pity really, as many of the topics covered are important ones for the management of tourism.
This approach is typified by the first paragraphs in the introduction by Wilks and Page. Sweeping statements on the impact of 9/11 are simply not useful – it does not follow that ‘our views’ should have, or have been changed forever by that event (hijacking and destruction of aircraft considerably predates 9/11), many more thousands of people have been affected by both individual and state sponsored terrorism in the past and at present, which they do not comment on or worry about, nor does it follow that the concept of the last decade is in any way more useful in placing actual risk in context. In their introduction to public liability the authors also fail to

acknowledge that insurance companies may have other reasons for restricting benefits, for example the very heavy losses from fraud and market manipulation may have just as much to do with this trend as questions of heightened security risks for travellers. So, while the subject matter of the book is indeed in parts very useful and comprehensive it, like the introductory chapter, suffers much from broad generalisations and inadequate research.
Having said that, there is considerable material of importance and usefulness in this book. Section 1 on medical conditions and injuries gives us some useful pointers to the types of security problems arising out of contemporary travel patterns (and Johnathan Cossar (2, 19–34) recognises the impact here of media hype). Cossar’s overview is indeed timely, reminding us that the growth of travel does demand more recognition by medical professionals of the importance of the travel trade. Page et al. (3, 35–52) call for a similar recognition of the impact of tourist accidents, although the predictive power of their analysis is somewhat reduced by the revelation that most traveller fatalities in their data were in fact caused by pre-existing cardio-vascular conditions amongst tourists. While most observers would likely be tempted to agree with them that deficiencies in data may affect our understanding of tourism-related accidents, their own use of data no more recent than 1996 does reduce the force of this observation. This chapter does identify a need for more primary research however.
As noted earlier, the first chapter in Section 2 is by Chris Ryan (4, 55–65), and is an excellent one. Ryan writes about the paradoxes inherent in and the context of risk acceptance in adventure tourism. He relates socio-psychological factors to contexts, perceived risks to actual ones, and theory to actuality in producing a model of risk perception associated with activity. Levels of skill are seen as an important mediating factor, but for this reviewer his recognition that

Book Reviews

201

adventure tourism is not about uncertainty of outcome, but about perceptions of success is one of the most useful points in a well-structured and important discussion. The same could be said of the following chapter by Ewart and Jamieson (5, 67–83), except for their claim that there is little long term policy and planning for adventure tourism. I think many authors would argue that on the contrary individual firms at least (by the very nature of their activities) do undertake much planning, and that governments etc do have adventure tourism policies; it is just that the implied ‘risky’ nature of adventure tourism can obscure such planning especially if a new location is under discussion.
On the other hand the following chapter by Bentley et al. (6, 85–97) illustrates the problems of the book as a whole. While it has been editorially related to earlier chapters, it itself is based on data that is quite old, and is restricted to an area of adventure tourism that did have a bad safety record, but that was 15 years ago. The actual discussion in the chapter however, implies that the information is up-to-date, and that the policy discussion is therefore relevant to today. I think readers would feel more comfortable with their conclusions on the issue of self-regulation vs government regulation if their data was in fact up-to-date – procedures and the incidence of accidents may well have changed in the past 10 or so years!
Section 3 opens with the Atherton’s (7, 101–115) review of current issues in travel and tourism law. They cover transport, accommodation, activities and attractions, adventure tourism, and the regulation of tour operators and travel agents. Their discussion, while necessarily general given that an exhaustive coverage of case law and precedent would be beyond this book, is to the point and useful. Certain of the more longstanding legal frameworks are described in more detail, like the Innkeepers Doctrine, Contract and Torts, but there is also a discussion on the legal treatment and implications of DVT and the position of insurers with respect to Theme Parks and similar

attractions. They note that there is a trend now for insurers to insist that customers agree not to sue if they are injured except in cases of gross negligence. In conclusion, the authors note that there needs to be uniform world-wide development of civil and criminal codes relating to travel and tourism, incorporating enforceable minimum standards, consumer protection laws, and a redefinition of the insurance system in relation to both operator and consumer protection.
The chapter by Wilks et al. (8, 117–126) adds to the debate on the legal aspects of tourist health and safety by looking at the responsibilities of travel agents in this area. It is this chapter and the others that touch on this topic that most concern this reviewer, because the implication of the discussion is that travel agents are somehow negligent if they do not choose to provide accurate and detailed advice on potential health risks and concerns to their clients. This is at the very least a contentious point of view, and one that many observers would challenge on legal grounds as being very wide of the mark in terms of strict liability. The supporting legal argument in the chapter is too brief to provide any direction here, so the conclusion must be that while there may be a need for advice there is absolutely no requirement yet for travel agents to furnish this. Indeed, the available evidence given in the body of the chapter shows that any such advice purporting to be anything more than a general guide to appropriate action could create real legal problems for travel agents, as distinct from a duty of care to pass on relevant information from other sources.
Chapter 9 by Wilks (127–139) outlines a series of World Tourism Organisation case studies on national approaches to safety and security that of itself is in the nature of a background to the sorts of security questions that the book covers. This chapter may have been better combined as illustration to the theoretical material in the later chapter by Bill Faulkner, and promoted as the central core of the book. By itself it does not add a great deal to the argument. The next chapter by Bruce

202 Journal of Sustainable Tourism

Prideaux (10, 143–154) on

international tourists and transport

safety is completely different.

Well-constructed and containing a

good and balanced mixture of theory,

examples and discussion, this quality

level of this chapter is what the editors

should have required from all

contributors but unfortunately only

obtained from a few. Prideaux shows

that national, regional and local

authorities often in fact ignore tourist

safety (unless it be affected by large

scale events), and suggests a model of

risk identification and strategy

implementation

that

if

operationalised to suit particular

destinations may provide a feasible

course of action for these authorities.

That this book is in tribute to the

work of Bill Faulkner is both

appropriate and a well-deserved

accolade, but why was his seminal

article in the field of tourism safety

not used as one of its primary anchor

points as noted above? As Chapter 11

(155–176) and part of Section 4 on

‘Selected Issues’ it is completely out of

place.

Making the feeling of material

being out of place stronger is the next

chapter – on biting midges and

tourism in Scotland by Blackwell &

Page (12, 177–196) – not only does this

chapter not determine the value of the

midges within their own ecological

niche before advocating them as a

candidate for eradication, but

virtually the whole constructed

discourse on the importance of their

impact on tourism is undone by the

reference to the argument being based

on undocumented comments about

this impact (p. 182). Thus the true

nature and impact of these ‘menaces’

is in fact unknown. Also Figure 12 is a

rainfall map surely, not a distribution

of midges map as claimed (or a key

that relates the two is missing).

Unfortunately the high standard of

the actual writing is not matched by

the contents of the chapter.

The final chapter apart from the

conclusions is by Barker et al. (13,

197–211) on tourist safety and the

urban environment. Tourism safety is

an important question in the context

of urban environments and this

chapter makes a very good stab at it.

Spoiled a little by the very dated

literature review, the chapter

nevertheless shows that it is very

difficult to in fact pin down any

differences between the propensity of

residents and tourists to commit

crimes. Data relating to the Americas

Cup races in Auckland, New Zealand

are examined in this chapter and show

little or no increase in crime during

this event. However, the probable

effect of increased event security on

such crime is noted.

Linda Walker and Stephen Page

attempt to wrap up the volume by

looking at risks, rights and

responsibilities in tourist well-being.

This is a well- written piece that does a

good, if limited, job in concluding the

book

satisfactorily.

The

categorisation of tourists as transient

visitors

(with

particular

responsibilities and needs) and visitor

well-being as an important

consideration for tourism operators

and destinations is well handled, but I

do not think that the safety of a

destination has in fact become an ever

increasing factor in the tourist

decision-making model. There have

always been warnings, and indeed

disasters, but these have never really

put tourists off (or not for long

anyway). Nevertheless, the authors

are right in their claim that we do need

to appreciate and understand the

issues affecting the visitor at the

destination level, and establish

criteria for appropriate action on the

part of relevant authorities. While the

book as a whole does assist in this, it is

flawed in many respects.

Malcolm J. Cooper
Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University, Japan

References Faulkner, B. (2001) Towards a
framework for tourism disaster management. In L. Fredline, L. Jago and C. Cooper (eds) Progressing Tourism Research – Bill Faulkner (pp. 244–268). Clevedon: Channel View Publications .
