Gerodontohgy, Volume 3, Number 1. 1984, ISSN 0734-0664
Oral Defenses and Disease: Salivary Gland Function ^
IRWIN D . MANDEL, D.D.S.2
Recent studies on parotid gland flow rate and composition in healthy subjects do not support the conventional wisdom that there is a gradual deterioration in salivary gland function with aging. With gustatory stimulation a diminution in flow rate was observed only in post-menopausal women taking medications. Studies of whole saliva and preliminary studies of submandibular saliva flow rate, however, suggest that these glands may exhibit functional changes not seen in the parotid. This would be consistent with histological findings. Reports to date on age effects on composition suggest modest selective changes in electrolytes (e.g. sodium) and only subtle changes in proteins (e.g. amylase isoenzymes). Clinical concerns (rampant caries, stomatitis, periodontal disease) arise largely because of the high number of elderly on medications or therapeutic interventions that affect salivary flow and the increase in incidence of diseases of the sahvary gland (e.g. sialadeneitis, Sjogren's, sarcoidosis). Reduction in flow rate and alterations in composition diminish salivary protective mechanisms, i.e. antibacterial activity, lubrication and protection of soft tissues, and maintenance of hard tissue integrity. Recent research on structure of mudns, the nature of the salivary lipids and interactions among salivary proteins should stimulate a second generation of studies on both the effects of aging per se and aberrations resulting from disease. Stimulation of compromised function and development of more effective salivary substitutes are also important areas of research.

47

In recent years we have come to appreciate that saliva is a complex fluid containing a variety of systems that serve a broad spectrum of physiologic needs. It even caters to our epicurean pleasures. The salivary contribution to ingestion and digestion is largely preparative and gastronomic; it forms a mucin-coated food bolus and adequate fluid volume to allow for ready passage along the chewing and swallowing surfaces and the provision of an appropriate environment for optimal functioning of the taste buds. Although this is the role of saliva only during meal time, we have come to embrace the view (perhaps conditioned by Pavlov's experiments) that it was the major function of saliva. For most of the day and night, however, the salivary glands are not responding to gustatory and masticatory stimuli but are providing a basal fluid that helps to maintain the integrity of the teeth, tongue and mucous membranes of the oral and oral pharyngeal areas. The electrolytes, non-electrolytes, peptides, glycoproteins and lipids from the major and minor salivary glands endow the secretions with a considerable protective potential [Mandel & Wotman, 1976; Sarosiek, et al., 1983; Tabak, et al., 1982]
FUNCTIONS OF SALIVA
\. Lubrication and Protection of the Mucous Membranes
The high and low molecular weight mucins (with associated and covalently bound lipids) and other proteins secreted by the major and minor salivary glands form a protective coating which serves as a natural barrier to food irritants, toxic products generated in bacterial

plaques, potential carcinogens such as smoking and food additives, and dehydration from mouth breathing.
2. Mechanical Cleansing
The phyical flow of saliva acts as a backward tide to remove food, cellular and bacterial remnants. This bacterial clearance by a combination of fluid flow and oral muscle action may be an important determinant of oral health.
3. pH Regulation
A variety of salivary systems (e.g., buffering, decarboxylation, deamination) can help maintain non-irritating pH levels on the mucous membrane surfaces in the face of a variety of acidic and basic foods, beverages, etc. introduced into the oral cavity. These salivary components can also function within the plaque and have a major role in controlling caries.
4. Maintenance of Tooth Integrity
A number of systems are required to provide a protective state of saturation of saliva with respect to the calcium phosphate salts which form the tooth mineral. This protective environment has to function on a pellicleplaque covered tooth surface that has both demineralizing and mineralizing potential [Hay, et al., 1979]. Glycoproteins and glycolipids are important on hard as well as soft tissue surfaces, acting to reduce wear that accompanies masticatory forces and mechanical abrasion

'Send reprint requests to Irwin D. Mandel, D.D.S., Columbia Dental School, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA ^From the Division of Preventive Dentistry, School of Dental and Oral Surgery, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA ^ 1984 Beech Hill Enterprises, Inc.

48 MANDEL

and minimizing erosion.
5. Antibacterial Activity
In addition to bacterial clearance by physical means, saliva can modify colonization of tooth and soft tissue surfaces by inducing aggregation and reducing adherence. This can involve specific antibodies (usually secretory igA), specific lectin-like interactions between salivary macromolecules and complementary receptors on the surface of the bacteria and non-specific bridging via calcium. In addition, there are several antibacterial systems which are bacteriostatic and, under proper conditions, bactericidal for oral organisms. The systems which are best characterized involve lysozyme, lactoferrin and lactoperoxidase.
Saliva is one of our natural resources. As with most natural resources we do not fully appreciate the bounty until there is an acute shortage. The critical importance of saHva in the protection of the oral cavity becomes most apparent when malfunctions of the salivary glands (due to disease, pharmacologic agents or thereapeutic intervention) result in dry mouth or xerostomia. The mucosa becomes dry, rough, sticky, bleeds readily and is subject to ulceration and infection [Rauch, 1970]. The tongue becomes red, smooth, shmy, hypersensitive and loses taste acuity [Henkin, et al., 1972]. Unless oral hygiene is meticulous, the teeth become covered with loosely adherent and tightly adherent plaque; caries progresses rapidly and extensively. These conditions may exacerbate periodontitis. In the edentulous patient, dentures become extremely difficult to manage with poor retention, sore spots and ulceration. The incidence of Candida infection increases. Patients with xerostomia have difficulty eating, speaking and even sleeping; they may feel miserable.
SALIVARY FUNCTION IN OLD AGE
What is the status of salivary function in the elderly? Is drying of the mouth and its attendant discomfitures and disfigurements a natural consequence of aging? The conventional wisdom, until a few years ago, indicated that it was at least partially a fact of Hfe. Recent studies, however, tend to refute this view [Baum 1981a; Chauncey, et al., 1981]. Let us examine the old and the new and see if we have reached resolution.
Baum [1981a] recently reviewed some of the older studies on diminution in salivary gland function and aging. He noted that the younger control subjects were usually active and healthy, the older were mainly institutionaHzed and often ill. It is pertinent that Makila [1979] found that, even in the institutionalized elderly, differences could be seen in flow rate of whole saliva when patients with no overt disease were compared with those with 1-2 diseases and those with 3-6 diseases. Even with such a gross differentiation it was apparent that illness and degree of saHvary diminution were related. It is also pertinent that in each of the categories women exhibited a lower flow rate than men.
Earlier, Bertram [1967] had reported a reduced flow

rate in the 65-85 year old group when compared to the 19-63 year olds. The decrement in flow rate was much greater in diseased subjects than in healthy. In all groups examined, females had a lower flow rate than males. This sex difference, especially in the younger, healthy subjects most probably reflects differences in gland size.
The recent studies on flow rate and age were part of the longitudinal and cross-sectional study of oral health in healthy veterans at the VA Outpatient Clinic in Boston [Chauncey, et al., 1981] and the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging [Baum, 1981b]. Both studies employed parotid saHva and the published findings are on flow stimulated by either a sour lemon flavored lozenge or 2% citric acid appHed to the tongue. Preliminary data are also now available on unstimulated parotid saHva [Heft & Baum, 1983]. In the Boston study there were no significant differences in flow rate when the four age categories were compared (25-39, 40-49, 50-59, and 60-74). All subjects were healthy males.
The Baltimore study involved women as well as men, ranging in age from 20-88. The subjects were in good health with only about 25% taking prescription medications. Baum [1981b] reported that among both women and men not taking prescription medication there was no diminution of stimulated parotid fluid output with increasing age. When subjects on medication were studied, Baum found that post-menopausal women, but not older men, exhibited a diminution in stimulated parotid saliva not evident in their non-medicated counterparts.
One of the possible reasons for the discordance between the old and the recent salivary studies was the use of a strong gustatory stimulus in the two studies with parotid saliva. Heft and Baum [1983] have now been examining unstimulated parotid saliva and have data on 39 males and 29 females not on chronic medication. They report no differences in unstimulated flow rate associated with age. Parotid function appears to be vary stable throughout life in healthy people, both in females and males.
What has been missing thus far, however, is a separate assessment of submandibular gland function with age and some measure of possible changes in the minor salivary gland secretions. The differences seen in the early studies with whole saliva could reflect changes in flow rate from these sources while parotid function was relatively normal. It is pertinent that the two major histological studies of age-related changes in saHvary glands were on submandibular glands [Scott, 1977; Waterhouse, et al., 1973]. These studies describe a loss of acinar tissue of 25-40% over the life span. Since the material examined was from autopsies, various disease states could have affected gland structure. The two studies, however, included over 3000 glands and the consistency of the findings would suggest the aging per se was indeed a factor. We have only limited data on histological changes in the parotid gland with aging [Andrews, 1952]. PreHminary findings by Pedersen, et al., [1983] lend credence to the view that there is a reduction in unstimulated submandibular gland flow rate with aging. They found that people aged 70-90 had only 22070 the flow rate of the younger subjects.

SALIVARY GLAND FUNCTION

49

This is a fertile field for further investigation. It would also be useful to examine age-related changes in the minor salivary glands, which generate only modest amounts of fluid but are important contributors to the coating of the mucous membranes and may affect markedly the subjective feeling of dryness. Innovations in collecting devices and techniques for submandibular and minor gland secretions would be welcome. Another area that requires closer examination is the impact of disease on salivary flow. It is clear from the VA and the Baltimore studies versus the earlier studies that it is much better to be healthy than sick.
Salivary Composition
Given the marked differences in composition among the parotid, submandibular, sublingual and minor gland secretions, and the pronounced effects of flow rate on the concentration of many constituents [Mandel, 1980], meaningful data can only be generated when separately collected secretions are examined at a known flow rate. We do have such data, mostly from the parotid, thanks to the two normative aging studies. In the Boston study [Chauncey, etal., 1981], sodium, chloride, calcium, total protein and uric acid levels decreased significantly with age. In contrast, the urea level increased in older age groups. The authors noted that, despite the maintenance of a normal flow rate, there was evidence of alterations in glandular electrolyte transport mechanisms, reflection of alterations in renal function (elevated urea), and a modest general reduction in protein synthesis.
The findings from the Baltimore study are only partially in agreement. Baum, et al. [1983] also noted differences in the handling of sodium. Although they did not measure chloride, it is probable that this decrement would have also been noted in the older subjects since these electrolytes are usually paired. In both studies, potassium was found to be unchanged throughout the age span. The Baltimore investigators did not, however, note a decrease with age in total protein, as reported in the Boston study. In addition to measuring total protein in parotid saliva, Baum, et al. [1982] also examined the acid proline rich proteins in 220 adults, 20-88 years old. No differences were noted in the ability of different aged males or females to secrete this major group of salivary proteins. The reasons for the differences between the two studies are not readily apparent.
In an earlier study of salivary proteins and aging, Chilla, et al. [1977] found no differences in amylase activity in parotid saliva when three groups of 30 subjects each (below 30, 31-60, 61 and older) were compared. They did find, however, that the number of isoamylases increases with age, the highest number being found in the over 61 group. This increase over the basic isoenzyme pattern may be due to deamidation of exposed asparagine residues and may be an age-dependent phenomenon, a "biological timer." This increase was not found in submandibular saliva [Arglebe, et al., 1978], however. This may be because in submandibular saliva, in contrast to parotid, there seems to be a decrease in amylase activity

with age. Total protein content of submandibular saliva also showed a parallel decrease with age [Arglebe, et al., 1978]. Arglebe [1981] suggests that the decrements in amylase in the secretion reflect the changes that have been reported in the histological studies of the submandibular gland with aging. Additional histological studies of parotid glands over the adult life span would be helpful.
We do not yet have a clear idea of the impact of aging on salivary composition. Sodium handling in the parotid gland is definitely affected; potassium is not. The status of the other electrolytes is equivocal. Any changes in parotid protein concentration would be modest at best. There may, however, be subtle changes in protein structure as evidenced by the increase in isoamylases. There are minimal data on submandibular proteins, but as is the case with flow rate, there are indications that further studies would be most productive. Tabak [personal communication] suggests that subtle structural alterations in mucin could lead to the sensation of dryness, even if flow rate per se was not appreciably diminished.
Slomiany, et al. [1983] have described both associated and covalently bound lipids in saliva. We know little about their role in saliva or the effects of aging. Lipid research should be pursued vigorously both in the secretions and in vitro employing various salivary gland and salivary gland cell model systems [Kuyatt & Baum, 1981]; Baum, et al., 1983]. These systems have been employed to study carbohydrates and proteins and they can be adapted to the study of lipids as well.
We have no data on the effects of aging on the nonimmunological systems of saliva, and only preliminary data on secretory IgA [Papas, et al., 1981], either total levels or specific antibodies. Functional studies on bacterial adherence and bacterial aggregation, as well as the determinants of bacterial clearance would be as important as the quantification of specific components. Salivary protection is dependent on the interaction of a spectrum of molecules and systems, and much research is needed to sort out the details.
CLINICAL CONCERNS
Salivary glands figure prominently in the chnical concerns of the elderly because of the relatively large number of elderly on medications or therapeutic interventions that diminish salivary flow and the age-related increase in diseases affecting salivary glands.
Therapeutic Interventions: Drug Related Xerostomia
Given the complex neural control of salivation, it is not surprising that a large number of pharmacologic agents affect salivary flow and possibly composition as well. A number of agents cause increased salivation (e.g., urecholine, neostigmine, physostigmine, potassium iodide), but the vast majority of medications affecting salivary glands result in decreased flow. More than 250 drugs include dry mouth as a possible side effect. The most widely used are antidepressants (e.g., amitryptyline), anticholinergics, antispasmodics (e.g., propantheline), an-

50 MANDEL

tihypertensives (e.g., clondine), antipsychotics (e.g., thorazine) and bronchodilators (e.g., ephedrine).
Extended use of medications that reduce salivary flow not only results in discomfort, but may also alter taste perception and the ability to form an adequate bolus; this is a combination that can impair adequate food intake. In addition, the loss of the protective components of saliva can result in a rapid, marked increase in caries. Where discontinuing medication or substituting less harmful agents is not possible, a protective regimen for the oral environment should be instituted. This should include: (1) chewing a sugar-free gun or sucking sugarfree candy to stimulate salivary flow without introducing additional cariogenic substrate, (2) an artificial saliva to relieve discomfort and reduce irritation to the mucous membranes, and (3) and instructed plaque control program to reduce the bacterial burden. A similar program should be initiated for any long term diminution in salivary flow, irradiation, obstruction, disease, etc.
The major changes in composition associated with xerostomia are a marked increase in total protein and in calcium, probably protein-bound [Mandel, unpublished observations]. These changes result in a thick, viscous secretion and add to the discomfiture of the patient. Electrolyte concentration is normal when the reduced flow rate is taken into consideration, since glandular function per se is normal [Mandel, 1980]. The problem is the pharmacologically mediated interference with neural control and/or blood flow.
Irradiation to the Head and Neck
Radiosensitive squamous cell carcinomas constitute a significant portion of head, neck and oral neoplasms. Hence irradiation is frequently part of, or the only therapy offered. Changes in flow rate and the chemical composition of saliva resulting from the irradiation have been the subject of a number of studies in the past few years. This area has recently been reviewed by Mandel [1980]. These studies give quantitative support to clinical observations on the rapid rate and marked impact of irradiation on parotid fluid flow rate and the somewhat lesser effect on the mucous secreting glands. The mucous glycoproteins may provide protection to the salivary glands per se as well as to the membrane surfaces they coat.
Brown, et al. [1976] found that during radiotherapy the concentration of all protein components assayed increased as the flow rate decreased. He employed whole saliva; given the effect of irradiation on mucous membranes as well as on the salivary glands, part of the protein increase may have been due to transudation from serum [Anderson, et al., 1981]. Such a transudation has been noted in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy [Izutsu, et al., 1981]. Examination of ductal saliva is needed to resolve the origin of the proteins. Regardless of the source, despite the increase in concentration, total protein output is minimal because of the low volume of oral fluids.
Two groups of investigators, employing whole saliva.

reported a marked increase in sodium concentration despite the marked reduction in flow rate [Ben-Aryeh, et al., 1975; Dreizen, et al., 1976]. Anderson, et al. [1981], however, found only a transient increase in sodium when parotid saliva was examined. Once again the question is raised of a change in whole saliva due to serum transudation versus an alteration (such as ductal resorption) in salivary gland function.
The issue is further complicated by a recent observation by Bodner, et al. [1983] on irradiated rats. They studied parotid cell function in vitro and in vivo 1 -7 days postexposure. Parotid secretory function was dramatically impaired, but all in vitro measures of cell function were unaffected. They state that "cells from irradiated rats are as capable as cells from controls of performing a variety of secretory and metabolic tasks." Bodner, et al. suggest that the primary site of X-ray damage is not necessarily acinar cells, but more probably extraglandular structures such as blood vessels and nerves. If indeed the secretory deficit is a secondary phenomenon, then therapeutic strategies can be devised.
Cancer Chemotherapy
Considering the large number of people receiving chemotherapy and the high incidence of stomatotoxic manifestation [Dreizen, 1978], there is a surprising paucity of data on the effects on salivary gland protein synthesis and secretory processes. Izutsu, et al. [1981] examined both parotid and whole saliva in patients receiving high doses of methotrexate therapy. They found a marked increase in whole saliva albumin and IgG and a modest increase in sodium. The concentration of albumin, IgG and sodium in concurrent samples of parotid saliva was essentially unchanged. The whole saliva changes would appear to be the consequence of the mucositis, and albumin could be used as an indicator of the reaction of the oral tissue to the drugs.
More recently. Fox [1983] examined parotid and submandibular saliva in a group of patients with lymphoblastic leukemia or Ewing's sarcoma, before therapy and again 7 and 14 days after the onset of therapy. He found no significant changes in flow rate or potassium concentration. There was, however, by day 7 a significant reduction in sodium concentration, in total protein and in two specific proteins. Fox suggests that compositional changes in saliva, especially in the antibacterial and tissue protection proteins, can effect the severity of the mucositis.
This is an important area of research. By taking advantage of available reagents and techniques, a whole spectrum of salivary proteins can be examined. In addition, the effect of various chemotherapeutic agents on salivary proteins, carbohydrate and lipid synthesis can be studied in vitro using model systems currently available.
DISEASES OF THE SALIVARY GLANDS
A variety of local and systemic diseases can affect the salivary glands and often result in compromised function.

SALIVARY GLAND FUNCTION

51

Table 1 Disease Affecting the Salivary Glands

LOCAL Obstructive: Inflammatory:

tumors, mucous plugs, stones acute viral or bacterial, chronic recurrent bacterial, or allergic

SYSTEMIC Sjogren's Syndrome: Lymphoepithelial lesions Sarcoidosis Cystic Fibrosis Hormonal Dysfunction: Diabetes, adrenal-cortex diseases, thyroid disease, acromegaly Hypertension Obesity and Hyperlipidemia Alcoholic Cirrhosis Malnutrition Lichen Planus Neurological Diseases: Bells' Palsy, Cerebal Palsy, Stroke Psychogenic Diseases

Table 1 lists some of these diseases. Effects of these diseases on saHvary gland function and composition have been the subject of two recent reviews [Mandel, 1980; Pfaltz & Chilla, 1981]. Hence, this review will focus only on problems that are frequently encountered in the elderly, the local imflammatory diseases, Sjogren's syndrome and oral lichen planus.
1. Acute Suppurative (Bacterial) Sialadenitis
Although an acute bacterial infection of a saHvary gland (usually the parotid) can occur throughout Hfe, it is most common in elderly, seriously ill, debilitated patients [Lundgren, et al., 1976]. It is almost always secondary to an illness or surgical procedure in which dehydration and reduced saHvary flow are accompanying features. In the submandibular gland it can follow obstruction due to stone formation. The association of acute suppurative parotitis with hospitalization, severe illness, impaired saHvary secretion and poor oral hygiene Has led to its designation as "nosocomial parotitis" [Lundgren, et al., 1976].
2. Chronic Recurrent Sialadenitis
The chronic inflammatory disorder of the saHvary glands resembles the acute in its predilection for the parotid. As in the acute situation, submandibular glands appear to be affected only as a sequelae to obstruction, usuaHy by stones. The chronic disease can occur at any age but is most common in older adults. Age per se does not seem to be significant; but older people are more apt to use medications and to suffer systemic diseases that reduce salivary flow rate and hence reduce the natural protective functions of the saliva. The lower incidence

of inflammatory disease in the submandibular glands than in the parotid Has been attributed to tHe greater inherent protective quality of the former. Current information on saHvary composition would lead to the speculation that if this were indeed the case, tHen the bacterial aggregating ability of the high molecular weight glycoproteins of the mucous acini ("mucins") would be tHe protective mechanism since the antibacterial systems are tHe same in both glands.
THe most dramatic cHanges in salivary cHemistry in chronic recurrent parotitis are manifested when a patient can be followed from an acute flare-up to apparent recovery. THe cHanges in electrolytes, as a measure of ductal cHanges in sucH situations, have been described by Mandel and Baurmash [1980], and the alterations in a spectrum of proteins by Tabak, et al., [1978].
Analysis of the saHvary secretions is of value to the clinician as well as to the researcher. Reviewing all of tHe current information on sialochemistry in cHronic recurrent parotitis, it seems that a clinician would gain most from quantitation of sodium, potassium, phosphate, albumin, and lactoferrin (Lf). Very High sodium, albumin, and Lf and low phosphate would cHaracterize the acute phase and readily differentiate it from other types of enlargement. THe degree of elevation in sodium and drop in phosphate content during tHe quiescent period would be an indication of residual pathology within the gland.
During the acute phase, patients are often Helped by small amounts of corticosteroids (0.75 mg dexametHasone for 5 days). Periodic dilation of Stenson's duct can often reduce the frequency of recurrence. Long-term cHronic recurrent parotitis can lead to reduced flow rate even during quiescent period and a protective regimen for tHe oral environment is appropiate.
3. Sjogren's Syndrome - Lymphoepithelial Lesions
THe salivary and lacrimal glands are common sites of involvement for several lymphoepitheHal lesions whicH are similar Histologically but may be associated witH different consteHations of systemic symptoms and different immunological cHaracteristics. THe most common of these disorders is Sjogren's syndrome (SS) wHicH ranks second only to rheumatoid arthritis among tHe connective tissue diseases. As originally described, the syndrome consisted of a triad (xerostomia, xerothalmia and rHeumatoid arthritis), or in about 30% of tHe subjects, other connective tissue diseases sucH as systemic lupus erytHematosus, polymyositis or polyarteritis nodosa. Biliary cirrHosis and some forms of kidney disease may also be associated with lacrimal and salivary gland involvement. This triad is now designated as secondary SS and tHe functional impairment of the saHvary and lacrimal glands per se (formerly known as sicca syndrome) is now known as primary SS [Moutsopoulos, et al., 1979].
The onset of symptoms is usually 40-60 years of age; 90% of the patients are women. It Has been reported [WHaley, et al., 1973] tHat almost 20% of elderly people

MANDEL

have at least a mild form of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes) and that nearly as many elderly females exhibit reduced salivary flow rate, but only 3% of the males. These numbers are derived from surveys which would include people across the spectrum of health, disease and medication, and would not be inconsistent with the studies of flow rate described earlier. The presence of reduced salivary or lacrimal flow is in itself not diagnostic of SS, however. Other criteria are required, such as immunologic aberrations, sialographic changes, and lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration of labial salivary glands [Chisolm & Mason, 1968], and in the author's laboratory, sialochemical changes [Mandel & Baurmash, 1976; Stuchell, et al., 1983]. Contrary to popular belief, enlargement is not a common features, except in about 25% with recurrent parotitis as a sequelae to the reduced flow. Whaley, et al. [1973] found that only 4% of his series of patients exhibited enlargement at any one time and it was usually unilateral.
There is a great deal of current research on the immunologic aberration in SS. The abnormality appears to be in immunoregulation [Moutsopoulos, et al., 1980] which can lead to tissue damage. A high percentage of patients with SS have specific auto-antibodies in their serum. There is also evidence of a genetic predisposition [Moutsopoulos, 1979].
A recent study had introduced the possibility that a viral etiology may be responsible for the basic pathogenesis of primary SS, the altered tissue giving rise to the autoimmune response. Shillitoe, et al. [1982] found that patients with primary SS had levels of serum IgG antibody to cytomegalovirus twice those of matched controls.
In studies at Columbia [Stuchell, et al., 1983], all patients with primary SS have been found to have virtually no salivary flow in the absence of stimulation, that is at rest. About 60% have a markedly reduced flow even with strong gustatory stimulation; while 40% have an essentially normal flow with stimulation. Both groups, however, exhibit the same abnormalities in salivary chemistry (elevated sodium, chloride, IgA, IgG and lactoferrin and a decreased concentration of phosphate). In view of the variation in flow rate in patients with SS, chemical quantification of selected salivary components can be a valuable aid in the differential diagnosis of this disease and in monitoring patients over time. Elevation in beta2microglobulin in both saliva and serum is also a diagnostic aid [Michalske & Daniels, 1975], in both secondary and primary SS.
As the newer diagnostic procedures (e.g. sialochemistry, labial gland biopsy, etc.) become more widely used, it is likely that most patients with connective tissue diseases will manifest histological, biochemical or immunochemical changes in the salivary (and probably lacrimal) glands. In a recent study, for example, Johnson, et al. [1982] found that 19 out of 20 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) exhibited abnormalities in flow rate, labial gland biopsy or salivary chemistry.
In primary SS therapy is largely symptomatic and protective. Artificial saliva is important to protect mucous

membranes, to stimulate salivary flow and to aid in reducing the risk of caries. Fluoride gels provide additional protection. The regimen is the same as with irradiated patients [Dreizen, et al., 1977; Greene, 1980]. In secondary SS, immunosuppresive agents and/or corticosteroids are often used to deal with the manifestations of the accompanying systemic connective tissue disorder. One of the concerns is the increased risk of Iymphosarcoma [Kassan, et al., 1979]
4. Oral Lichen Planus
The most recent addition to the lengthening list of diseases that affect salivary glands is oral lichen planus. Lundstrom, et al., [1982] studied 39 patients (31 women and 8 men), mean age of 60, with clinical as well as histological criteria of oral lichen planus. Eighty-seven percent of the patients exhibited a low or very low secretion rate. The deficit was greatest in the older patients. Radiographic changes in the salivary glands were seen in 89% of the patients examined. Histological examination if labial gland biopsies on a subset of patients revealed 93% with acinar atrophy and 80% with lymphocytic infiltration. A complete sialochemistry should be of interest in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS
Although parotid saliva flow rate appears to be unaffected by age in healthy people there are indications that submandibular saliva, and possibly minor gland secretions may be affected and further work is indicated. A new generation of biochemical studies are required to examine possible aging effects on salivary protein structure, especially high molecular weight glycoproteins and salivary lipids, both associated and covalently bound. The aging effects should examine functions as well as structure; factors such as viscosity, bacterial adherence and aggregation need to be considered. Research is also required on the effects of therapeutic interventions and salivary gland disease on structure and function of salivary proteins and lipids. Laboratory systems can be helpful in augmenting the clinical studies. Given the existing information, new approaches can be considered for stimulating salivary flow and improving oral comfort in compromised patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Dr. Bruce Baum and his co-workers for their generosity in providing me with copies of papers in press and in preparation.
REFERENCES
Anderson, M.W., Izutsu, K.T., & Rice, J.C.: Parotid gland pathophysiology after mixed gamma and neutron irradiation of cancer patients. Oral Surgery, 52:495-500, 1981.
Arglebe, C : Biochemistry of human saliva. In C.R. Pfaltz & R. Chilla (Eds.), Sialadenosis and sialadenitis. Advances in Oto-

SALIVARY GLAND FUNCTION

53

Rhino-Laryngology, 26:97-208, Basel: S. Karger, 1981
Arglebe, C , Flaam, B., & Chilla, R.: Amylase activity, protein concentration and isoamylase patterns of human submandibular saliva. Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 40:199-205, 1978.
Baum, B.J.: Research on aging and oral health: An assessment of current status and future needs. Special Care in Dentistry, 1:156-164, 1981a.
Baum, B.J.: Evaluation of stimulated parotid saliva flow rate in different age groups. Journal of Dental Research, 60:1292-1296, 1981b.
Baiim, B.J., Costa, P.T., Jr., & Izutsu, K.T.: Alteration in sodium handling by human parotid glands during aging: Failure to support a simple two stage secretion model. American Journal of Physiology, in press.
Baum, B.J., Kousvelari, E., & Oppenheim, F.G.: Exocrine protein secretion from human parotid glands aging: Stable release of the acidic proline-rich proteins. Journal of Gerontology, 37:393-395, 1982.
Baum, B.J., Kuyatt, B.L., & Humphreys, S.: Protein production and processing in young adult and aged rat submandibular gland cells in vitro. Mechanisms of Aging and Development, in press, 1983.
Ben-Aryeh, H., Gutman, D., Szargel, R., & Laufer, D.: Effects of irradiation on saliva in cancer patients. International Journal of Oral Surgery, 4:205-209, 1975.
Bertram, U.: Xerostomia. Acta Odontologica Scandinavica, (Supplement 49), 25:1-126, 1967.
Bodner, L., Kuyatt, B.L., Hand, A.R., & Baum, B.J.: Rat parotid cell function in vitro following x-irradiation in vivo. Radiation Research, in press.
Brown, L.R., Dreizen, S., & Rider, L.J.: The effect of radiation induced xerostomia on saliva and serum lysozyme and immunoglobulin levels. Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine and Oral Pathology, 41:83-89, 1976.
Chauncey, H.H., Borkan, G.A., Wayler, A.H., Feller, R.P. & Kapur, K.K.: Parotid fluid composition in health aging males. Advances in Physiological Sciences, 28:323-328, 1981
Chilla, R., Kropp, T., & Arglebe, C : Amylaseaktivitat and isoamylasenmuster in parotisspeichel des Menschen. Laryngology Rhinology Otology, 56:912-918, 1977.
Chisholm, D.M., & Mason, D.R.: Labial salivary gland biopsy in Sjogren's disease. Journal of Clinical Pathology, 21:656-660, 1968.
Dreizen, S.: Stomatoxic manifestations of cancer chemotherapy. Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry, 40:650-655, 1978.
Dreizen, S., Brown, L.R., Daly, T.E., & Drane, J.B.: Prevention of xerostomia-related dental caries in irradiated cancer patients. Journal of Dental Research, 56:99-104, 1977.
Fox, P.: Effect of chemotherapy. In B.J. Baum, (Moderator), Therapy induced dysfunctions of salivary glands: Implications for oral health. NIH Combined Clinical Staff Conference, May 1983.
Greene, C.S.: Prevention and treatment of caries in adults with xerostomia. Journal of Prevention Dentistry, 6:215-219, 1980.
Hay, D.I., Moreno, E . C , & Schlesinger, D.H.: Phosphoprotein inhibitors of calcium phosphate precipitation from salivary secretion. Inorganic Perspectives Biology and Medicine, 2:271-285, 1979.

Heft, M.W., & Baum, B.K.: Unstimulated and stimulated parotid salivary flow in different aged persons. Journal of Dental Research, abstract in press, 1984.
Henkin, R.I., Talal, N., Larson, A.L., &Mattern, C : Abnormalities of taste and smell in Sjogren's syndrome. Annals of Internal Medicine, 76:375-385, 1972.
Izutsu, K.T., Truelove, E.L., Bleyer, W.A., Anderson, W.M., Schubert, M.M., & Rice, J . C : Whole saliva albumin as an indicator of stomatitis in cancer therapy patients. Cancer, 48:1450-1454, 1981.
Johnsson, R., Bratthall, D.., & Nyberg, G.: Histologic and sialochemical findings indicating sicca syndrome in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Oral Surgery, 54:635-630, 1982.
Kassan, S.S, Thomas, T.L., & Moutsopoulos, H.M.: Increased risk of lymphoma in sicca syndrome. Annals of Internal Medicine, 89:888-892, 1979.
Kuyatt, B.L., & Baum, B.J.: Characteristic of submandibular glands from young and aged rats. Journal of Dental Research, 60:936-941, 1981.
Lundgren, A., Kylen, P., & Odkvist, L.M.: Noscomial parotitis. Acta Oto-laryngology, 82:275-279, 1976.
Lundstrom, l.M.C, Goran, K., Anneroth, B., & Bergstedt, H.F.: Salivary gland function and changes in patients with oral lichen planus. Scandinavian Journal of Dental Research, 90:443-458, 1982.
Makila, E.: Oral health among the inmates of old people's homes. 2. Salivary secretion. Proceedings Einnish Dental Society, 73:64-69, 1977.
Mandel, I.D.: Sialochemistry in diseases and clinical situations affecting salivary glands. CRC Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences, 12:321-366, 1980.
Mandel, I.D., & Baurmash, H.: Sialochemistry in chronic recurrent parotitis: electrolytes and glucose. Journal of Oral Pathology, 9:92-98, 1980.
Mandel, I.D., & Baurmash, H.: Sialochemistry in Sjogren's syndrome. Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine and Oral Pathology, 41:182-187, 1976.
Mandel, I.D., & Wotman, S.: The salivary secretions in health and disease. Oral Sciences Review, 8:25-47, 1976.
Michalski, J.P., & Daniels, T.E.: Beta2 microglobulin and lymphocytic infiltration in Sjogren's syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 9293:1228-1232, 1975.
Moutsopoulos, H.M., Chused, T.M.. Mann, D.L., Klippel, J.H., Fauci, A.S., Frank, M.M., Lawley, T.J., & Hamburger, M.I.: Sjogren's syndrome (Sicca syndrome): Current issues. Annals of Internal Medicine, 92:212-226, 1980.
Moutsopoulos, H.M., Webber, B.L., Vlagopoulos, E.P., Chused, T.M., & Decker, J.L.: differences in the clinical manifestations of sicca syndrome in the presence and absence of rheumatoid arthritis. The American Journal of Medicine, 66:733-736, 1979.
Papas, A., Schluckebier, S.K., Cohn, V., & Hay, D.I.: Inhibition of calcium phosphate precipitation by saliva from young and older human subjects. Journal of Dental Research, 60 (special issue), 622 (abstract) 1981.
Pederson, W., Izutsu, K., Schubert, M., Mersai, T. and Truelove, E.: Age dependent decreases in htiman submandibular gland flow rates as measured under resting and post stimulation conditions. Journal of Dental Research, in press.

54 MANDEL

Rauch, S.: Diseases of the salivary glands. In R. Gorlin (Ed.), Thoma's Oral Pathology, Vol. 2, 6th edition. Chapter 22. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby, 1974.
Sarosiek, U.J., Slomiany, A., & Slomiany, B.L.: The role of glycoproteins and lipids in retardation of H* diffusion by gastric mucus. IRCS Medical Science, 11:351, 1983.
Scott, J.: Quantitative age changes in the histological structure of human submandibular salivary glands. Archives of Oral Biology, 22:221-227, 1977.
Shillitoe, E.J., Daniels, T.E., Whitcher, J.P., Strand, C.V., Talal, N., & Greenspan, J.S.: Antibody to cytomegalovirus in patients with Sjogren's syndrome. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 25:260-265, 1982.
Slomiany, B.L., Jozwiak, Z., Slomiany, A., Takagi, A., & Mandel, I.D.: Occurrence of fatty acids covalenty bound to protein in human submandibular saliva. IRCS Medical Science, 11:765, 1983.
Slomiany, B.L., Murty, V.L.N., Aono, M., Slomiany, A., & Mandel, I.D.: Lipid composition of human parotid and submandibular saliva from caries resistant and caries- susceptible adults. Archives of Oral Biology. 27:803-808, 1982

Slomiany, A., Slomiany, B.L., & Mandel, I.D.: Lipid composition of human parotid saliva from light and heavy dental calculus formers. Archives of Oral Biology, 26:151-152, 1981.
Stuchell, R.N., Mandel, I.D., & Baurmash, H.: Clinical utilization of sialochemistry in Sjogren's syndrome. Journal of Oral Pathology, in press, 1984.
Tabak, L.A., Levine, M.J., Mandel, I.D., & Ellision, S.A.: Role of salivary mucins in the protection of the oral cavity. Journal of Oral Pathology, 11:1-17, 1982.
Tabak, L.A., Mandel, I.D., Herrera, M.S., & Baurmash, H.: Changes in lactoferrin and other proteins in a case of chronic recurrent parotitis. Journal of Oral Pathology, 7:91-98, 1978.
Waterhouse, J.P., Chisholm, D.M., Winter, R.B., Patel, M., & Yale, R.S.: Replacement of functional parenchymal cells by fat and connective tissue in human submandibular salivary glands: An age-related change. Journal of Oral Pathology, 2:16-27, 1973.
Whaley, K., Willianson, J., Chisholm, D.M., Webb, J., Mason, D.E., & Buchanan, W.W.: Sjogren's syndrome I. Sicca components. Quarterly Journal of Medicine, 42:279-304, 1973.
